[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi.
It's James here
from Food Matters.
And today we're going to
be talking about seven ways
to heal the gut naturally.
The gut and the microbiome
has become a huge topic
of discussion lately.
We're understanding more about
how the gut rules and controls
so many different
elements of the body.
And we have an extra
special guest with me today,
naturopathic doctor and the
founder of Natural Instincts
Healing, Kate Reardon.
Hi, Kate.
>> Hi, James.
>> So tell me a little
bit about yourself,
how you got into
this field of work,
and how we found
ourselves here today.
>> Yeah.
Well, my background's in
naturopathy and nutritional
medicine.
So I love using all
kinds of natural things
to heal our bodies, basically.
And I'm also an
energetic healer.
And so my passion really
lies in the whole mind,
body, spirit side of health.
And I've always been
interested in the gut.
I had gut problems when
I was a child growing up.
And it was more of a personal
discovery at the start.
And now I've built my
whole career around it.
So I have a health
retreat in Bali,
where people
actually come and do
fasts, and detoxing,
and cleansing and things
to primarily heal the gut
because it's that important.
>> So why is the
gut so important?
I mean, we're hearing
more about it these days.
I mean, in the '80s,
it was about fat.
We shouldn't eat fat, you know.
And then it was all about carbs.
And then we're learning more
about the systemic nature
of the gut and hormones.
But why has the gut become
such an important topic
of discussion lately?
>> Well, really simply, James,
it's the center of our being.
So you know when they
say "that gut feeling"?
>> Yeah.
>> It's really, really
important on all levels.
So physically, it's the way that
we get most of our nutrients,
by the food that we eat.
And if your nutrients,
and vitamins, and minerals
aren't getting out to
the rest of your body,
then you're going
to not feel great,
and your health and
healing and vitality
just isn't going to be there.
>> Sure.
>> So it all comes back to
how we digest food in the gut.
And also, on an
emotional level, it's
our self-worth and
our self-esteem.
It's that inner power, that
core-like drive that we have.
So it's important on all levels.
And that's what I'm so excited
to chat to you about today,
is how to really go in deeper
and how can we really help
heal ourselves, mind, body, and
spirit, starting with the gut.
>> Nice.
>> Yeah.
>> So if someone has a
gut that's out of whack--
and I can certainly feel myself
when my gut's out of whack.
Like if I have too much
bread or too much gluten,
or if I'm stressed out,
I'll start to notice it.
But it'll be subtle
for me at first.
And then there'll be
different symptoms
that will develop later.
But for people
that are listening
to this interview, what are
some of the major symptoms
that their gut might not
be operating efficiently?
>> Well, our body
is just so wise.
And it tells us when
things are out of balance.
So if your gut's
out of balance, it's
different for every
single person.
What you experience
is going to be
different to what I experience.
So it could be anything from
headaches, to nausea, diarrhea,
constipation, just
bloating, indigestion.
It could even be as deep
as skin rashes, poor sleep.
The menstrual cycle for
women can be thrown out.
You can feel really irritable or
just like-- grr-- all the time.
>> Maybe that's like
irritable bowel syndrome?
>> Exactly, exactly.
>> Irritable person syndrome.
And just different things
within the appetite as well.
So decreased appetite,
or not hungry,
or ravenous all the time.
I mean, there's so many
signs and symptoms.
>> OK.
So if we wanted to talk about
transitioning to these tips
for helping people
heal the gut naturally,
I mean, I know that you
go through this in-depth
at your retreats, where
you take people step
by step through this process.
But you know, if we were going
to go through these seven
tips-- and keeping in mind that
there's people like me that
will be in my kitchen in 10
minutes after this interview,
or there's people at home
that'll be in their kitchens
or going through
their day-to-day life
after they watch this interview.
So what are some
of the seven steps?
I mean, one of the first things
you wanted to talk about,
I think, was food and the
foods we should be eating
and shouldn't be eating.
>> Exactly.
I mean, well, you
guys at Food Matters
just have the most amazing
knowledge and recipes
that everyone can get.
And the primary thing,
keeping it super simple,
is choosing foods that
are closest to Mother
Nature intended them to be.
So we call them
whole foods, right?
So any type of processing--
heating and processing
in different ways--
it takes all the bioavailable
vitamins and minerals out
of the food.
So I have this
general rule of thumb,
which is the more
colors on the packet
and the longer the shelf
life, the harder it
is to digest in the body.
So eating whole foods,
like fresh fruits
and veggies and things like
that, it sounds simple.
We all know it.
But it has profound effects.
And if you just cut out
processed food out of the diet,
I guarantee your gut
will be functioning
better from straight away.
You'll feel it instantly.
>> So what you're saying in a
roundabout way is that a lot
of processed food is causing
these gut issues as well,
really.
>> Exactly.
Yeah.
>> OK.
So eliminating certain foods
and eating more of the foods
that nature intended.
>> Exactly.
Exactly.
>> You sound like
my grandmother.
>> Well, that's how we
meant to eat, right,
like our grandparents ate.
Yeah.
Because they didn't
have all this
processed food, and frozen
meals, and all that stuff.
It didn't exist back then.
>> That's true.
And I think about
Laurentine's grandmother,
who passed away, bless her,
last year at 102 years of age.
>> That's incredible.
>> The reality for her was that
the first 30 or 40 years of her
life, she ate 100%
organic, almost 100% local
and in season, and with
hardly any packaged foods
or pre-prepared foods.
There might have been
some preserved foods
which were preserved by
her in a traditional way.
So to think in such a
short period of time,
we've come so far from
that and now we're
experiencing so many
gut-related issues,
it makes sense to sort of run
back to that idea that we had.
>> Exactly.
And processing strips all the
minerals and vitamins out,
and the taste.
And then what we
have to do is add
in all of these
chemical additives
so it actually tastes
like something.
So what you're eating
is not actually food.
It's a food-based product.
So yeah.
Processed foods aren't
good for the gut.
>> So eat real food.
Step one.
Step two, you said, it's
about the way we eat.
>> The way we eat.
>> Why is that important?
>> It's so important, James.
Because everyone thinks,
OK, I've got to eat.
We know we have to eat
healthy to feel good, right?
But quite so often,
we're running around,
eating in the car,
eating at our desk,
eating while watching the kids,
and eating at our computers.
And how we eat really
affects biochemically
how we digest our food.
So the first steps of
digestion, number one
is smelling, smelling the food.
And number two is
tasting and chewing.
>> I'll bet there's so many
people that skip that step,
the smelling.
It's like, it's in before
they even smell it.
>> Exactly.
>> I mean, I've been
guilty sometimes.
When we get busy, it's
just like, I need to eat.
>> It's like, quick, food now.
But the smelling stage is
called the cephalic stage.
And when we smell our
food, this hormone actually
goes up to the brain, and
that triggers the body
to start getting ready for food.
So the stomach will start
secreting hydrochloric acid.
All the enzymes will
be getting ready.
So if you're smelling
your food already inside,
it's like your little
digestive system is going,
hey, right, woo-hoo!
We're getting fed.
Let's go.
And everything is
starting to flow.
And then number two is chewing.
Now, I see people all
the time that don't
chew their food properly.
And I can't emphasize
this enough.
Because the more
you chew, there's
all the salivary
glands in the mouth,
and the enzymes
break that food down.
So by the time it gets down the
esophagus and into the stomach,
it's nice and easy to be
broken down by the acid.
But if you're just
inhaling or swallowing,
then the stomach
has to work harder.
And we don't want to put any
extra pressure on an already
functioning digestive
system because it's
hard enough to digest anyway.
>> And this seems like a
trap that people would fall
into altogether.
It's like they don't smell
it, they don't chew it.
They eat while
they're on the run,
or they eat while
they're on the tube,
they're watching TV.
So you know, to stop and think
about each of those three steps
causes you to be in
the moment, causes you
to be present with your food.
>> And it's like you know when
you smell, like, amazing, like,
mom's cooking or something,
wafting through the air,
and you're like,
oh, that's so good.
I want some of that.
That's the chemical reaction
that actually happens.
But it happens in
every single meal.
And that link is a major
link that we don't really
practice in modern day lives.
>> Maybe when we sit down
to say grace or whatever,
an evening ritual, let's
all smell our meal.
>> Exactly.
Giving thanks to Mother Earth
for providing this for us
and getting our body ready
to absorb and assimilate
the nutrients.
Yeah.
>> OK, cool.
That's an interesting one.
I'm down for that.
>> And you're going
to do it today, right?
>> I'm going to do it today.
I have a little ritual before
I eat and wherever I am,
whether it's on an airplane--
that's particularly when
I get strange looks--
or whether it's at dinnertime.
I just sort of hold my hands
out and do a short blessing.
And it can be as
simple as just saying
the word "thank you," or
"thanks," or just having some--
And to me, that triggers my body
to be like, OK, just slow it
down a bit.
We're here to digest.
We're here to eat.
And I've found that a really
important ritual for me.
And it's been a great thing
that we've incorporated
into family dinners.
>> That has a powerful
biochemical effect
on the physical body.
And that was another thing
that I wanted to bring up,
was just having a moment of,
like, OK, I'm going to eat now.
So whatever that is
to you, whether it's
deep breaths, or saying thank
you or grace before meals.
But it actually allows
the body to know that it's
going to be getting food soon.
>> Great.
OK, so step one is
eat whole foods.
Step two is the way you eat.
>> Yeah.
Smelling--
>> Smelling--
>> Chewing--
>> Chewing.
And being in a
stress-free environment.
>> Exactly.
>> And step three I have here
on the list is, what was it,
external factors, the
listening to your body.
So how do we become more
attuned with our body,
and why is listening to our
body important for gut health?
>> Any signs and symptoms that
you experience is your body
talking to you.
So if you are experiencing a
bit of nausea, or a headache,
or your skin's broken
out, ringing in the ears,
your hair and nails
just aren't thriving,
your body is trying
to tell you something.
And it's tapping into
that wisdom that's
the real key in not only
accelerating your health,
but getting that vitality back.
So in relation to the gut and
how we want to look at that,
it's like how am I feeling now?
OK.
For example, I might
be a bit nauseous,
not feeling so great,
just not in my flow.
And then so what did
I eat last night,
or what did I eat yesterday.
And just putting the
correlation together.
Because no one knows your
body better than you.
And the deeper you can go
into learning and reading
the wisdom, it's talking
to us every single day.
And like I said before,
we're all different.
So you and I could go
out, eat the same meal
that is probably not good for
either of us, let's just say--
we'd never do that,
but let's just say--
and you would experience
different physical signs
and symptoms to what I would.
So for me, if I'm eating
too much wheat and gluten,
like you mentioned before, I get
really bloated and really foggy
in my head.
It's more like my thoughts.
I just can't get that clarity.
>> Well, for me, I know
if I eat too much gluten,
which I lovingly do when
I'm on holidays in Europe
because the bread is
so beautiful there--
>> It doesn't count in Europe.
>> It doesn't count.
Of course.
But one of the
things I get is I'll
start to get dandruff,
randomly enough.
And that's a very strange
thing to try to connect.
But I've noticed
it a few times now.
And then I'll see
people with dandruff.
And I'm like, I wonder if
that's, for them, the case
as well.
And it may or may not be.
But I've started to find
some subtle connections
in my body with what I eat
and then what I notice later.
And I think that's really a
profound idea about this point,
around listening
to your body, is
the idea of eat for how
you're going to feel later,
not how you feel in the moment.
And that really can be a very
tough thing to do at times.
But the more that you
experience this biofeedback
mechanism, the more
I've been able to know
that if I eat that, I'm
going to be irritable later,
or I'm going to be edgy,
or I'm going to be foggy.
And then you'll start to
tend away from those foods
naturally.
>> Exactly.
And that is critical
with the gut.
So I guess a takeaway
home for people
at home, how do I tap
into my body's wisdom.
Do a food diary,
writing down what
you're actually eating that
day and how you're feeling.
Because we can do the
opposite to this as well.
Those foods that make us
feel vibrant, and alive,
and motivated, and just
really energetic, look
and see what they are.
And bring more of them
into the diet as well.
So it works both ways.
>> Are you also suggesting that
there's not one diet that fits
one person?
>> I would be
suggesting that, James.
Yeah, of course.
We're all such unique
individual creatures.
And knowing what is
like the body's wisdom
is not only what doesn't serve
me, but what does serve me,
and how can I incorporate that.
And writing it all
down and just listening
to the signs and
symptoms of your body,
taking a few moments every
day, sitting quietly--
how am I feeling?
Like, how am I actually feeling?
I've got a bit of tension.
My stomach's a bit rumbly.
Just really listening,
because your body
is talking to you all the time.
And when we listen and
extract that wisdom,
we're able to give the
body what it needs.
When you give the
body what it needs,
it's going to be perfectly
functioning, better
than it ever could be.
>> Right.
I love that.
Awesome.
Next point is stress.
This is a huge one.
I mean, to me, when
I think about stress,
there's so many different
elements to stress.
There is the stress
of like, well, I'm
flying to another
country, and I've
got back-to-back
meetings for two weeks.
Or there is the
stress of, like, is
something going to be right
at home in our personal life.
And then there's the stress
of, like, toxins on the body.
Or there's the stress of,
like, environmental stress
or stressful relationships
and people you're around.
So what type of stress
impacts the gut,
and how can we deal with that?
>> All stress-- it doesn't
matter where it comes from,
it puts us into what we
call flight or fight mode.
So what that means
is that there's
a hormone called cortisol in
our body, and it's elevated.
So when our cortisol
is elevated,
all our natural
enzymes and acids
that break down and help us to
absorb our food is decreased.
So it doesn't really
matter what type of stress
you're going under.
It could be just a bad building
at work with lots of computers.
It just decreases the body's
natural ability to digest.
So what we really want to do,
in terms of healing our gut--
and it starts with the gut.
But dealing with stress
has such profound effects
on every single
part of your life.
So this is like where it starts,
and it just ends up everywhere,
if you feel so
amazing, is to really--
I don't want to use
the word de-stress,
but balance out
the stress levels.
Yeah?
So what does that mean for you?
It could be going for a surf,
or sitting down for 10 minutes
without a fight, or just
being out in the ocean,
or getting your
feet on the ground
and just really letting the
body's natural ability to heal
itself come back.
>> Great.
>> And in going back and saying
what we were talking about
before, never eating when
you're really, really,
really stressed.
Because everything contracts
when we're in flight or fight.
And so if you're
trying to put food
in when you're all
contracted and stressed,
then the body's not going
to digest it properly.
So that's why it's
so important to--
[INHALES] like, hey,
I'm going to eat now.
I'm going to nourish my body.
I'm going to drink some water.
And I'm going to feel good.
>> Beautiful.
>> Yeah?
Can you see the difference?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
Great.
So the first thing we
covered was the food to eat.
Then we covered the way you eat.
Then we covered
listening to your body.
And then we just did stress.
And now the next
point is purpose.
And to me, this is
a fascinating one.
>> It's a big one.
I mean, we have some
films inside FMTV,
such as "Finding Joe," which
talks about Joseph Campbell's
way of the warrior,
the hero's journey,
and how important it
is to be on purpose.
And you know, I
find that whenever
I'm not following
my purpose, then
I find myself more stressed
out or less motivated.
And the more that I bring
myself back to center,
I really feel great
about so many things
and feel good in my body.
Is that what we're
talking about?
>> That's exactly what
we're talking about.
And it's that age old thing of,
I should have followed my gut,
you know?
Because this governs
so much in our life
beyond the physical body.
So there's a energy center
here called the solar plexus.
And the solar plexus is where
our inner power comes from.
It's our self-worth
and who we are
and what we're
presenting to the world.
And so if you're
on track with that,
it's really hard for the
gut to not be as well.
Because we're more than the
muscle and bones of our body,
where we have these big,
beautiful mind that can help us
create amazing things.
And we're part of a bigger
spiritual source as well.
Whatever label you want to put
on it, it's all the same thing.
It's mind, body, spirit.
That's what makes us up.
So I always look
at people who come
to see me for really horrible
gut things physically.
And when they do, I'm
always like, well,
how are you feeling emotionally?
And there's always a
story, or there's always
something going on.
If you're just treating
the gut physically,
you're never really
going to get well.
Because we're more than this.
But if you're looking
at both of them,
then you have this synergy
of holistic healing.
And you're going to
not only get well,
but you're going to thrive.
It's the difference between
feeling OK and feeling
like, oh, my god,
this is so amazing.
I can't believe I get
to live this life.
>> What are some examples of
people or some general examples
or ideas of people that
are not on purpose?
Is it them following a
career that they don't love?
Or is it them following
a person or relationship
that they don't love?
Or is it all of the above?
Is it other things?
How can people relate to this?
>> Yeah, exactly.
I think those are
really good examples.
But I also think
it's anything that's
not in true alignment
with who you are.
Because quite often,
our decisions and things
that we do, we're trying
to please other people,
or keeping other
people happy, or doing
what we think we
should do instead of
what we really want to do.
And this is what Joseph talks
about in the "Hero's Journey."
It's following that
bliss, following
that bigger thing that's
going to make you feel alive.
And if you're
chasing, or following,
or embracing
something that makes
you feel so happy and so joyful,
how can the body not feel that,
you know?
So it really comes down.
And there's been so
much scientific research
out there that our emotions
affect our biochemistry,
and specifically the gut.
There is such a strong
gut-mind connection.
And you know, this is science.
They are discovering more
and more and more every day.
So in the words of
Joseph Campbell,
if you're following your
bliss, then I would say,
essentially, you're
healing your gut.
>> That's cool.
I love that.
Follow your bliss, here you go.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Excellent.
OK, so the next thing we
have is water and hydration.
>> Yes, this is a huge one.
They call me the
water police in Bali
because I'm always saying to
people, how much water have you
drunk today?
Most of the signs and
symptoms of our body,
those little niggly ones-- like
headache-y, or not quite right,
or dry throat, or dry skin--
all comes down to dehydration.
And the digestive system
needs a lot of water
to really let everything
go, especially
with the peristalsis,
moving things
through the large intestine.
It needs to be
nice and lubricated
for a good smooth passage
and a good evacuation.
So you need to drink water.
There's no way of
getting around this.
Everyone needs to drink water.
But not only that, the
oxygen molecule from water
provides the lining of the
gut with heaps of minerals
that it needs to heal.
So not only are you
hydrating yourself,
you're actually healing
the very, very, very
tiny microbial life
that sit inside the gut.
>> Yeah.
Wow.
I didn't know that.
It's great.
>> It's really important.
And it's such a simple one.
But everyone just
needs to drink water.
There's no way of
getting around this.
We all know it.
But it's putting
it into practice.
So getting things like having
a water bottle on your desk
all the time.
>> Or in the shower.
It's a great place
to drink water.
>> Exactly.
Exactly.
Or I even get clients
to set an alarm
on their phone three times
a day that says drink water.
Because if we're busy,
we're running around--
and we've got crazy
lives, right--
we forget.
We're human.
So just reminding yourself to
constantly be drinking water.
And if you drink
a perfect amount
of water, so minimum of two
liters a day, per person,
even if it's winter, and more
in summer when you're sweating
and if you're doing cardio
and things like that--
you will be operating
at such a better level
biochemically than
if you're not.
So it's so-- can you say
I'm passionate about it?
It's so important, James!
>> Well, I know from experience
that the more water I drink,
I'm on the toilet.
You know what I mean?
And both ways, you know.
And that's a really
important thing.
It's one of the main
ways that we detoxify.
It's one of the main ways.
And toxins obviously
impact our function.
So great stuff.
So drink more water-- hydration.
>> It's a simple one,
but it's so crucial.
It's so crucial.
>> So let's get down
to some specifics here.
The seventh point we
have here to discuss
is supplements and herbs.
I'm sure a lot of
people out there
have watched a TV commercial
with the good bacteria
versus the bad bacteria.
And they're out there
buying probiotics,
or they're taking some herbs.
How effective are these
supplements, what supplements
are good, and what do
you sort of generally
recommend for a gut
healing protocol?
>> Well, the first thing to
really getting our heads about
is that your gut needs to
absorb and assimilate nutrients.
That's its primary function.
So if you're not really
looking after the gut,
you could be eating the best
organic died on the planet.
But if you've gut isn't
functioning properly,
you're not going to
get those nutrients.
And so what that really
means is getting down
into the nitty-gritty.
So like you mentioned
before, the probiotics--
getting all the gut flora right,
getting all the inflammation
out of the stomach
lining, making
sure you've got adequate acid
coming out of the stomach,
and also the liver and
pancreas and small intestine,
and all the enzymes
and everything's
working really, really well.
So probiotics is a big one.
And I know you guys
love fermented foods.
And you have lots of
recipes and tips about that.
That is fantastic.
Because what it's doing, it's
building up that good bacteria.
And the way that I see
it, it's like they're
little army men in the gut.
So if you're eating something
that's not so good for you
or meant to be in there, it's
like, hey, you get out of here.
Get out.
>> Or if you eat well, and
you've got stress and so forth,
it's supporting you.
>> It's supporting you.
Exactly.
So that's really,
really important.
So fermented foods,
things like sauerkraut
and all that kind of
stuff, good probiotic.
Some things that I really
recommend is aloe vera juice.
Because you know when
your skin is sunburned,
it's red and inflamed, and
you put aloe on to soothe it?
It is exactly the
same inside the gut.
So if you've got red inflamed
esophagus, and all the way
down out through the
anus, then the aloe vera
actually puts this beautiful
musilage effect on it.
And you need to
find one, though,
that's not loaded with sugar.
So it's really bitter.
If it tastes gross, it's
probably the best one.
>> There's a reason they
say bitter medicine.
>> Exactly.
>> I've been actually recently
cutting aloe from the garden
and putting it through a juicer.
And it's getting that--
>> Making it into smoothies.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Or aloe vera sashimi.
>> Oh, I haven't heard of that.
>> Yeah.
It's like sashimi--
>> I'm going to try that.
>> A little bit of
tamari or something.
>> I love it.
>> Yeah, that's a cool idea.
Any herbs?
>> Another herb that's similar
process to aloe vera is
slippery elm, which
is the bark of a tree.
And it comes in powdered
form or capsules.
Powder's the best, though.
And what it actually does is the
cells of our digestive system
sit in there, and they're
meant to look like a Lego.
And so as food's
coming in, it kind of
has this protective mode.
But if we're eating heaps
of processed foods, heaps
of stimulants,
we're stressed, you
know, just the
day-to-day living,
it affects the integrity
of the gut wall.
So those Lego
pieces split apart.
That's what we call
leaky gut syndrome.
And then all the
minerals and nutrients
leak out before we can
properly absorb them.
So what slippery elm
does, it puts a nice coat
on the inside of the gut.
So it keeps all the
minerals in here
so that we're able to absorb
and assimilate them, whilst
healing the cells of the gut.
So it's a really,
really awesome one.
And my favorite
way to have this is
a teaspoon in some water with
some high grade manuka honey.
>> Oh, nice.
>> Yeah, the manuka
honey helps it to heal.
>> Is it a powdered form,
or is it like a tea form?
>> It's a powdered form.
The powdered form is more
potent, so it's better.
And heat it up in a
little bit of warm water
and drink it before bed.
It's called a belly love drink.
>> Belly love.
>> Yeah.
>> OK, so let's recap
here a little bit.
So we've gone through
these seven tips
for healing we got naturally.
We've looked at some of
the problems initially
and some of the symptoms
of healing the gut.
And you said they can be many
and varied, from skin rashes,
to nausea, to weight gain, to
fatigue, to chronic illness.
So step one was eat as
mother nature intended.
Eat whole foods.
>> Whole, vibrant, colorful,
yummy, delicious food.
>> Fantastic.
Number two was the
way that you eat.
>> Yes, smelling, tasting,
chewing, mindfulness.
>> Number three was
listening to your body.
>> Exactly.
Just taking a few moments
every day to tune in
and ask yourself,
how am I feeling?
>> Great.
Number four was purpose.
>> Yes, following your bliss.
>> Number five was stress.
>> Yeah, de-stressing wherever
you can and bringing yourself
back into a balance is
going to help the body.
>> Then six was
water and hydration.
>> Drink, drink, drink,
drink, drink, drink, drink.
>> And the last one was
specific supplements and herbs.
>> Exactly.
So I mentioned slippery
elm, and manuka honey,
and probiotics, and aloe vera.
And just like finding foods
that make you feel good.
>> Thanks so much for
your time today, Kate.
>> Thanks for having me, James.
>> James here for
"Food Matters."
And I really hope you
enjoyed those seven
tips for healing
the gut naturally
with Kate Reardon from
Natural Instincts Healing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]